The following is a conversation with John Hopfield,
Professor Princeton, whose life's work weaved beautifully
through biology, chemistry, neuroscience, and physics.
Most crucially, he saw the messy world of biology
through the piercing eyes of a physicist.
He's perhaps best known for his work
on associative neural networks,
now known as Hopfield Networks.
They were one of the early ideas that catalyzed
the development of the modern field of deep learning.
As his 2019 Franklin Medal in Physics Award states,
he applied concepts of theoretical physics
to provide new insights on important biological questions
in a variety of areas, including genetics and neuroscience,
with significant impact on machine learning.
And as John says in his 2018 article titled,
Now What, his accomplishments have often come about
by asking that very question, Now What,
and often responding by a major change of direction.
This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast.
If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube,
give it five stars on Apple Podcasts,
support it on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter,
and Lex Friedman, spelled F R I D M A N.
As usual, I'll do one or two minutes of ads now
and never any ads in the middle
that can break the flow of the conversation.
I hope that works for you
and doesn't hurt the listening experience.
This show is presented by Cash App,
the number one finance app in the App Store.
When you get it, use code Lex Podcast.
Cash App lets you send money to friends, buy Bitcoin,
and invest in the stock market with as little as $1.
Since Cash App does fractional share trading,
let me mention that the order execution algorithm
that works behind the scenes
to create the abstraction of fractional orders
is to me an algorithmic marvel.
So big props to the Cash App engineers
for solving a hard problem
that in the end provides an easy interface
that takes a step up the next layer of abstraction
over the stock market,
making trading more accessible for new investors
and diversification much easier.
So again, if you get Cash App from the App Store,
Google Play, and use code Lex Podcast,
you'll get $10, and Cash App will also donate $10 to first,
one of my favorite organizations
that is helping advance robotics and STEM education
for young people around the world.
And now here's my conversation with John Hopfield.
What difference between biological neural networks
and artificial neural networks
is most captivating and profound to you?
At the higher philosophical level,
let's not get technical just yet.
One of the things that very much intrigues me
is the fact that neurons have all kinds of components,
properties to them.
And evolutionary biology,
if you have some little quirk
into how a molecule works or how a cell works,
and it can make use of evolution will sharpen it up
and make it into a useful feature rather than a glitch.
And so you expect in neurobiology
for evolution to have captured all kinds of possibilities
of getting neurons, of how you get neurons
to do things for you.
And that aspect has been completely suppressed
in artificial neural networks.
Do the glitches become features in the biological neural network?
They can.
Look, let me take one of the things
that I used to do research on.
If you take things which oscillate,
they have rhythms which are sort of close to each other.
Under some circumstances,
these things will have a phase transition
and suddenly the rhythm will, everybody will fall into step.
There was a marvelous physical example of that
in the Millennium Bridge across the Thames River
about, build about 2001.
And pedestrians walking across,
pedestrians don't walk, synchronize,
they don't walk in lock step.
But they're all walking about the same frequency.
And the bridge could sway at that frequency
and the slight sway made pedestrians
tend a little bit to lock in the step.
And after a while, the bridge was oscillating back and forth
on the pedestrians for walking in step to it.
And you could see it in the movies made out of the bridge.
And the engineers made a simple mind at a mistake.
They had assumed when you walk,
it's step, step, step, and it's back and forth motion.
But when you walk, it's also right foot left
with side to side motion.
It's the side to side motion
for which the bridge was strong enough,
but it wasn't stiff enough.
And as a result, you would feel the motion
and you'd fall into step with it.
And people were very uncomfortable with it.
They closed the bridge for two years
while they built stiffening for it.
Now, nerve cells produce action potentials.
You have a bunch of cells which are loosely coupled together
producing action potentials of the same rate.
There'll be some circumstances
under which these things can lock together.
Other circumstances in which they won't.
Well, if they fire together,
you can be sure that the other cells are gonna notice it.
So you can make a computational feature out of this
in an evolving brain.
Most artificial neural networks
don't even have action potentials,
let alone have the possibility for synchronizing them.
And you mentioned the evolutionary process.
So there, the evolutionary process
that builds on top of biological systems
leverages that the weird mess of it somehow.
So how do you make sense of that ability
to leverage all the different kinds of complexities
in the biological brain?
Well, look, in the biological molecule level,
you have a piece of DNA
which encodes for a particular protein.
You could duplicate that piece of DNA
and now one part of it encodes for that protein,
but the other one could itself change a little bit
and thus start coding for a molecule
which is slightly different.
Now, that molecule was just slightly different.
Had a function which helped any old chemical reaction
was important to the cell.
You would go ahead and let that evolution
slowly improve that function.
And so you have the possibility of duplicating
and then having things drift apart,
one of them retain the old function,
the other one do something new for you.
And there's evolutionary pressure to improve.
Look, there isn't in computers too,
but it's improvement has to do with closing
some companies and openings of others.
The evolutionary process looks a little different.
Yeah.
Similar timescale, perhaps.
What's shorter in timescale?
Companies close, yeah, go bankrupt and are born,
yeah, shorter, but not much shorter.
Some company lasts the century, but yeah, you're right.
I mean, if you think of companies as a single organism
that builds and you all know, yeah,
it's a fascinating dual correspondence there
between biological.
And companies have difficulty having a new product,
competing with an old product.
And when IBM built its first PC,
you probably read the book,
they made a little isolated internal unit to make the PC.
And for the first time in IBM's history,
they didn't insist that you build it out of IBM components.
But they understood that they could get into this market,
which is a very different thing
by completely changing their culture.
And biology finds other markets in a more adaptive way.
In a more adaptive way.
Yeah, it's better at it.
It's better at that kind of integration.
So maybe you've already said it,
but what to use the most beautiful aspect
or mechanism of the human mind?
Is it the adaptive,
the ability to adapt as you've described?
Or is there some other little quirk
that you particularly like?
Adaptation is everything when you get down to it.
But the differences between adaptation
where you're learning goes on only over a generation
that over evolutionary time,
where your learning goes on at the time scale
of one individual who must learn from the environment
during that individual's lifetime.
And biology has both kinds of learning in it.
And the thing which makes neurobiology hard
is that it's a mathematical system as it were built
on this other kind of evolutionary system.
What do you mean by mathematical system?
Where's the math and the biology?
Well, when you talk to a computer scientist
about neural networks, it's all math.
The fact that biology actually came about
from evolution and the fact that
biology is about a system which you can build
in three dimensions.
If you look at computer chips,
computer chips are basically two dimensional structures.
Maybe 2.1 dimensions, but they really have difficulty
doing three dimensional wiring.
Biology is neocortex is actually also sheet like
and it sits on top of the white matter,
which is about 10 times the volume of the gray matter
and contains all what you might call the wires.
But there's a huge, the effect of computer structure
on what is easy and what is hard is immense.
And biology does, it makes some things easy
that are very difficult to understand
how to do computationally.
On the other hand, it can't do simple
floating point arithmetic, so it's awfully stupid.
Yeah, and you're saying this kind of three dimensional
complicated structure makes, it's still math.
It's still doing math.
The kind of math is doing enables you to solve problems
of a very different kind.
That's right, that's right.
So you mentioned two kinds of adaptation.
The evolutionary adaptation and the adaptation
are learning at the scale of a single human life.
Which is particularly beautiful to you
and interesting from a research
and from just a human perspective
and which is more powerful.
I find things most interesting that I begin to see
how to get into the edges of them
and tease them apart a little bit to see how they work.
And since I can't see the evolutionary process going on,
I am in awe of it, but I find it just a black hole
as far as trying to understand what to do.
And so in a certain sense, I'm in awe of it,
but I couldn't be interested in working on it.
The human life's time scale is however a thing
you can tease apart and study.
Yeah, you can do it.
There's developmental neurobiology
which understands how the connections
and how the structure evolves
from a combination of what the genetics is like
and the real, the fact that you're building a system
in three dimensions.
In just days and months, those early days
of a human life are really interesting.
They are, and of course, there are times
of immense cell multiplication.
There are also times of the greatest cell death
in the brain is during infancy.
It's turnover.
So what is not effective, what is not wired well enough
to use at the moment, throw it out.
It's a mysterious process.
From, let me ask, from what field do you think
the biggest breakthroughs in understanding
the mind will come in the next decades?
Is it neuroscience, computer science, neurobiology,
psychology, physics, maybe math, maybe literature?
Well, of course, I see the world
always through a lens of physics.
I grew up in physics and the way I pick problems
is very characteristic of physics
and of an intellectual background,
which is not psychology, which is not chemistry
and so on and so on.
At both of your parents are physicists.
Both of my parents were physicists
and the real thing I got out of that
was a feeling that the world is an understandable place.
And if you do enough experiments
and think about what they mean
and structure things that you can do,
the mathematics of the relevant to the experiments,
you ought to be able to understand how things work.
But that was, that was a few years ago.
Did you change your mind at all?
Through many decades of trying to understand the mind,
of studying in different kinds of way,
not even the mind, just biological systems.
You still have hope that physics that you can understand.
There's a question of what do you mean by understand?
Of course.
When I taught freshman physics, I used to say,
I wanted to get physics to understand the subject,
to understand Newton's laws.
I didn't want them simply to memorize a set of examples
to which they knew the equations to write down,
to generate the answers.
I had this nebulous idea of understanding.
So that if you looked at a situation, you could say,
oh, I expect the ball to make that trajectory.
Or I expect some intuitive notion of understanding.
And I don't know how to express that very well.
And I've never known how to express it well.
And you run smack up against it.
When you do these, look at these simple neural nets,
feed forward neural nets, which do amazing things.
And yet, you know, contain nothing of the essence
of what I would have felt was understanding.
Understanding is more than just an enormous lookup table.
Let's linger on that.
How sure you are of that?
What if the table gets really big?
So, I mean, asks another way,
these feed forward neural networks,
do you think they'll ever understand?
Could answer that in two ways.
I think if you look at real systems,
feedback is an essential aspect
of how these real systems compute.
On the other hand, if I have a mathematical system
with feedback, I know I can unlayer this and do it.
But I have an exponential expansion
in the amount of stuff I have to build
if I can solve the problem that way.
So feedback is essential.
So we can talk even about recurrent neural recurrence.
But do you think all the pieces are there
to achieve understanding through these simple mechanisms?
Like, back to our original question,
what is the fundamental,
is there a fundamental difference
between artificial neural networks and biological?
Or is it just a bunch of surface stuff?
Suppose you ask a neurosurgeon,
when has somebody dead?
Yeah.
They'll probably go back to saying,
well, I can look at the brain rhythms
and tell you if this is a brain
which has never got a function again.
This one is, this other one is one
is if we treat it well, it's still recoverable.
And then just do that by some electrodes
looking at simple electrical patterns.
Just don't look in any detail at all
at what individual neurons are doing.
These rhythms are already absent
from anything that goes on at Google.
Yeah, but the rhythms,
but the rhythms what?
So, well, that's like comparing,
okay, I'll tell you, it's like you're comparing
the greatest classical musician in the world
to a child first learning to play.
The question, but they're still both playing the piano.
I'm asking, is there, will it ever go on at Google?
Do you have a hope?
Because you're one of the seminal figures
in both launching both disciplines,
both sides of the river.
I think it's going to go on generation after generation
the way it has where what you might call
the AI computer science community says,
let's take the following.
This is our model of neurobiology at the moment.
Let's pretend it's good enough
and do everything we can with it.
And it does interesting things.
And after the while, it sort of grinds into the sand
and you say, oh, something else is needed
for neurobiology and some other grand thing comes in
and enables you to go a lot further.
What will go into the sand again?
And I think there couldn't be generations
of this evolution.
I don't know how many of them
and each one is going to get you further
into what a brain does and in some sense
past the Turing test longer and more broad aspects.
And how many of these are there
are going to have to be before you say,
I've made something, I've made a human.
I don't know.
But your senses, it might be a couple.
My senses might be a couple more.
Yeah.
And going back to my brainwaves, as it were.
Yes.
From the AI point of view,
if they would say, ah, maybe these are an debut phenomenon
and not important at all.
The first car I had, a real wreck of a 1936 Dodge,
go above about 45 miles an hour and the wheels would shimmy.
Yeah.
Good, good speedometer that.
Now, don't be designed at the car that way.
The car is malfunctioning to have that.
But in biology, if it were useful to know,
when are you going more than 45 miles an hour?
You just capture that
and you wouldn't worry about where it came from.
Yeah.
It's going to be a long time before that kind of thing,
which can take place in large complex networks of things,
is actually used in the computation.
Look, the, how many transistors are there
at your laptop these days?
Actually, I don't know the number.
It's on the scale of 10 to the 10.
I can't remember the number either.
Yeah, yeah.
And all the transistors are somewhat similar
and most physical systems with that many parts,
all of which are similar, have collective properties.
Yes.
Sound waves and air, earthquakes,
what have you have collective properties, weather.
There are no collective properties used
in artificial neural networks, in AI.
Yeah, it's very...
If biology uses them,
it's going to take us to more generations of things
to further people to actually dig in
and see how they are used and what they mean.
See, you're very right.
You might have to return several times to neurobiology
and try to make our transistors more messy.
Yeah, yeah.
At the same time, the simple ones
will conquer big aspects.
And I think one of the most biggest surprises to me was
how well learning systems are manifestly nonbiological,
how important they can be actually
and how important and how useful they can be in AI.
So, if we can just take a stroll to some of your work
that is incredibly surprising,
that it works as well as it does,
that launched a lot of the recent work with neural networks.
If we go to what are now called Hopfield Networks,
can you tell me what is associative memory in the mind
for the human side?
Let's explore memory for a bit.
Okay, what do you mean by associative memory is,
you have a memory of each of your friends.
Your friend has all kinds of properties
from what they look like,
what their voice sounds like,
to where they went to college,
where you met them, go on and on,
what science papers they've written.
And if I start talking about
a five foot 10 wire rated cognitive scientist
that's got a very bad back,
it doesn't take very long for you to say,
oh, he's talking about Jeff Hinton.
I never mentioned the name or anything very particular,
but somehow a few facts that are associated
with a particular person enables you to get
hold of the rest of the facts, or not the rest of them,
another subset of them.
And it's this ability to link things together,
link experiences together,
which goes on to the general name of associative memory.
And a large part of intelligent behavior
is actually just large associative memories at work,
as far as I can see.
What do you think is the mechanism
of how it works in the mind?
Is it a mystery to you still?
Do you have inklings of how this essential thing
for cognition works?
What I made 35 years ago was, of course,
a crude physics model to show the kind of
to actually enable you to understand
my old sense of understanding as a physicist,
because you could say, ah, I understand
why this goes to stable states.
It's like things going downhill.
Right.
And that gives you something with which to think
in physical terms, rather than only in mathematical terms.
So you've created these associative artificial,
you know, that works.
That's right.
And now if you look at what I did,
I didn't at all describe a system which gracefully learns.
I described a system in which you could understand
how learning could link things together,
how very crudely it might learn.
One of the things which intrigues me is I reinvestigate
that this now, to some extent, is look, I see you,
I'll see you every second for the next hour or what have you.
Each look at you is a little bit different.
I don't store all those second by second images.
I don't store 3,000 images.
I somehow compact this information.
So I now have a view of you which I can use.
It doesn't slavishly remember anything in particular,
but it compacts the information into useful chunks
which are somehow, it's these chunks
which are not just activities of neurons,
bigger things than that,
which are the real entities which are useful to you.
Useful to you to describe, to compress this information.
And you have to compress it in such a way
that if the information comes in just like this again,
I don't bother to rewrite it or efforts to rewrite it.
Simply do not yield anything
because those things are already written.
And that needs to be, not look this up,
as if I started somewhere already.
There has to be something which is much more automatic
in the machine hardware.
Right, so in the human mind,
how complicated is that process, do you think?
So you've created, feels weird to be sitting
with John Hopfield calling him Hopfield Networks, but...
It is weird.
Yeah, but nevertheless, that's what everyone calls him.
So here we are.
So that's a simplification.
That's what a physicist would do.
You and Richard Feynman sat down
and talked about associative memory.
Now, as a, if you look at the mind
where you can't quite simplify it so perfectly, do you...
Well, let me back track just a little bit.
Yeah.
Biology is about dynamical systems.
Computers are dynamical systems.
You can ask, if you're about to math,
the model biology, if you want to model neurobiology,
what is the time scale?
There's a dynamical system in which of a fairly fast time
scale in which you could say,
the synaptes don't change much during this computation.
So think of the synaptes as fixed
and just do the dynamics of the activity.
Or you can say, the synaptes are changing fast enough
that I have to have the synaptic dynamics
working at the same time as the system dynamics
in order to understand the biology.
Most are, if you look at the feedforward artificial neural
nets, they're all done as learnings.
First of all, I spent some time learning,
not performing, and I turned off learning and I performed.
Right.
That's not biology.
And so as I look more deeply at neurobiology,
even as an associative memory, I've
got to face the fact that the dynamics of a synapse change
is going on all the time.
And I can't just get by by saying,
I'll do the dynamics of activity with fixed synapses.
So the synaptic, the dynamics of the synapses
is actually fundamental to the whole system.
Yeah, yeah.
And there's nothing necessarily separating the time scales.
When the time scales can be separated,
it's neat from the physicists of the mathematicians
point of view.
But it's not necessarily true in neurobiology.
See, you're kind of dancing beautifully
between showing a lot of respect to physics
and then also saying that physics cannot quite
reach the complexity of biology.
So where do you land?
Or do you continuously dance between the two points?
I continuously dance between them
because my whole notion of understanding
is that you can describe to somebody else
how something works in ways which are honest and believable
and still not describe all the nuts and bolts in detail.
Weather.
I can describe weather as 10 to the 32 molecules
colliding in the atmosphere.
I can simulate weather that way or have a big enough machine.
I'll simulate it accurately.
It's no good for understanding.
If I want to understand things, I want to understand things
in terms of wind patterns, hurricanes, pressure
differentials, and so on.
All things as they're collective.
And the physicists in me always hopes
that biology will have some things which
can be said about it which are both true and for which you
don't need all the molecular details of the molecules
colliding.
That's what I mean from the roots of physics
by understanding.
So what did, again, sorry, but Hopfield Networks
help you understand?
What insight did it give us about memory, about learning?
They didn't give insights about learning.
They gave insights about how things having learned
could be expressed.
How having learned a picture of you
reminds me of your name, but it didn't describe
a reasonable way of actually doing the learning.
They only said if you had previously
learned the connections of this kind of pattern
would now be able to behave in a physical way with the day
off with part of the pattern in here,
the other part of the pattern will complete over here.
I could understand that physics if the right learning
stuff had already been put in.
And it could understand why then putting in a picture
of somebody else would generate something else over here.
But it did not have a reasonable description
of the learning process.
But even if we get learning, that's
just a powerful concept that forming representations that
are useful to be robust for error correction kind of thing.
So this is kind of what the biology does
that we're talking about.
What my paper did was simply enable you.
There are lots of ways of being robust.
If you think of a dynamical system,
you think of a system where a path is going on in time.
And if you think of a computer, there's
a computational path which is going on in a huge dimensional
space of 1s and 0s.
And an error correction system is a system
which, if you get a little bit off that trajectory,
will push you back onto that trajectory again.
So you get to the same answer in spite of the fact
that there were things that the computation wasn't being
ideally done all the way along the line.
And there are lots of models for error correction.
But one of the models for error correction
is to say there's a valley that you're following
flowing down.
And if you push a little bit off the valley,
just like water being pushed a little bit by a rock,
it gets back and follows the course of the river.
And that, basically, the analog in the physical system
which enables you to say, oh, yes, error free computation
and an associative memory are very much like things
that I can understand from point of view
of a physical system.
The physical system can be, under some circumstances,
an accurate metaphor.
It's not the only metaphor.
There are error correction schemes
which don't have a valley and energy behind them.
But those are error correction schemes
which a mathematician may be able to understand,
but I don't.
So there's the physical metaphor that seems to work here.
That's right.
So these kinds of networks actually
led to a lot of the work that is going on now
in neural networks, artificial neural networks.
So the follow on work with the restricted Boltzmann machines
and deep belief nets followed on from these ideas
of the Hopfield network.
So what do you think about this continued progress
of that work towards now revigorated exploration
of feedforward neural networks and recurrent neural networks
and convolutional neural networks
and kinds of networks that are helping solve image recognition,
natural language processing, all that kind of stuff?
It always intrigued me that one of the most long lived
of the learning systems is the Boltzmann machine, which
is intrinsically a feedback network.
And with the brilliance of Hinden and Sinovsky
to understand how to do learning in that,
and it's still a useful way to understand learning
and understand, and the learning that you understand in that
has something to do with the way that feedforward systems
work, but it's not always exactly simple
to express that intuition.
But it always amuses me to see Hinden going back
to the will yet again on a form of the Boltzmann machine,
because really that which has feedback and interesting
probabilities in it is a lovely encapsulation
of something computational.
Something computational?
Something both computational and physical.
Computational, and it's very much related
to feedforward networks.
Physical in that Boltzmann machine learning
is really learning a set of parameters
for a physics, Hamiltonian, or energy function.
What do you think about learning in this whole domain?
Do you think the F4 mentioned guy, Jeff Hinton,
all the work there with back propagation,
all the kind of learning that goes on in these networks,
if we compare it to learning in the brain, for example,
is there echoes of the same kind of power
that back propagation reveals about these kinds
of recurrent networks, or is it something fundamentally
different going on in the brain?
I don't think the brain is as deep
as the deepest networks go, the deepest computer science
networks.
And I do wonder whether part of that depth of the computer
science networks is necessitated by the fact
that the only learning that's easily done on a machine
is feedforward.
And so there is the question of, to what extent
is the biology, which has some feedforward and some feedback,
been captured by something which has got many more neurons,
but much more depth than the neurons in it?
So part of you wonders if the feedback is actually
more essential than the number of neurons or the depth,
the dynamics of the feedback.
The dynamics of the feedback, look,
if you don't have feedback, it's a little bit like a building,
a big computer, and running it through one clock cycle.
And then you can't do anything.
Do you reload something coming in?
How do you use the fact that there
are multiple clocks like that?
How do I use the fact that you can close your eyes,
stop listening to me, and think about a chess board
for two minutes without any input whatsoever?
Yeah, that memory thing.
That's fundamentally a feedback kind of mechanism.
You're going back to something.
Yes, it's hard to understand.
It's hard to introspect.
Let alone consciousness.
Oh, let alone consciousness, yes, yes.
Because that's tied up in there, too.
You can't just put that on another shelf.
Every once in a while, I get interested in consciousness,
and then I go and I've done that for years
and ask one of my betters, as it were,
their view on consciousness.
It's been interesting collecting them.
What is consciousness?
Let's try to take a brief step into that room.
Well, I asked Marvin Minsky, as you go on consciousness.
And Marvin said, consciousness is basically overrated.
It may be an epiphenomenon.
After all, all the things your brain does,
these are actually hard computations you do unconsciously.
And there's so much evidence that even the simple things you do,
you can make committed decisions about them.
The neurobiologist can say, he's now committed.
He's going to move the hand left before you know it.
So his view that consciousness is not,
that's just like little icing on the cake.
The real cake is in the subconscious.
Yeah, yeah.
Subconscious, nonconscious.
Nonconscious, that's the better word, sir.
It's only that Freud captured the other word.
Yeah, it's a confusing word, subconscious.
Nicholas Chater wrote an interesting book.
I think the title of it is The Mind is Flat.
In an neural net sense, it might be
flat as something which is a very broad neural net
without really any layers in depth,
or as a deep brain would be many layers and not so broad.
In the same sense that if you pushed Minsky hard enough,
he would probably have said, consciousness
is your effort to explain to yourself
that which you have already done.
Yeah, it's the weaving of the narrative
around the things that already been computed for you.
That's right.
And so much of what we do for our memories of events,
for example, if there's some traumatic event, you witness,
you will have a few facts about it correctly done.
If somebody asks you about it, you
will weave a narrative which is actually
much more rich in detail than that.
Based on some anchor points you have of correct things
and pulling together general knowledge on the other,
but you will have a narrative.
And once you generate that narrative,
you are very likely to repeat that narrative
and claim that all the things you have in it
are actually the correct things.
There was a marvelous example of that in the Watergate
slash impeachment era of John Dean.
John Dean, you're too young to know,
had been the personal lawyer of Nixon.
And so John Dean was involved in the cover up.
And John Dean ultimately realized
the only way to keep himself out of jail for a long time
was actually to tell some of the truths about Nixon.
And John Dean was a tremendous witness.
He would remember these conversations
in great detail and very convincing detail.
And long afterward, some of the techniques
of some of the tapes, the secret tapes
from which John Dean was recalling these conversations
were published.
And one found out that John Dean had a good,
but not exceptional memory.
What he had was an ability to paint vividly and in some sense
accurately the tone of what was going on.
By the way, that's a beautiful description
of consciousness.
Do you, like, where do you stand in your today?
So perhaps it changes day to day,
but where do you stand on the importance of consciousness
in our whole big mess of cognition?
Is it just a little narrative maker?
Or is it actually fundamental to intelligence?
That's a very hard one.
When I asked Francis Crick about consciousness,
he launched forward a long monologue about Mendel
and the peas and how Mendel knew that there was something.
And how biologists understood that there was something
in inheritance, which was just very, very different.
And the fact that inherited traits
didn't just wash out into a gray, but were this or this
and propagated.
But that was absolutely fundamental to biology.
And it took generations of biologists
to understand that there was genetics.
And it took another generation or two
to understand that genetics came from DNA.
But very shortly after Mendel, thinking biologists did realize
that there was a deep problem about inheritance.
And Francis would have liked to have said,
and that's why I'm working on consciousness.
But of course, he didn't have any smoking
gun in the sense of Mendel.
And that's the weakness of his position.
If you read his book, which he wrote with Koch, I think.
Yeah, Christoph Koch, yeah.
I find it unconvincing for the smoking gun reason.
So I go on collecting views without actually having taken
a very strong one myself.
Because I haven't seen the entry point.
Not seeing the smoking gun from the point of view of physics.
I don't see the entry point.
Whereas in neurobiology, once I understood
the idea of a collective evolution of dynamics, which
could be described as a collective phenomenon,
I thought, ah, there's a point where
what I know about physics is so different
from any neurobiologist that I have something
that I might be able to contribute.
And right now, there's no way to grasp
a consciousness from a physics perspective.
From my point of view, that's correct.
And of course, people, physicists, like everybody else,
they think very muddly about things.
You have the closely related question about free will.
Do you believe you have free will?
Physicists will give an offhand answer,
and then backtrack, backtrack, backtrack,
where they realize that the answer they gave
must fundamentally contradict the laws of physics.
Naturally answering questions of free will and consciousness
naturally lead to contradictions
from a physics perspective.
Because it eventually ends up with quantum mechanics,
and then you get into that whole mess
of trying to understand how much, from a physics perspective,
how much is determined, already predetermined,
how much is already deterministic about our universe.
And there's lots of different.
And if you don't push quite that far,
you can say essentially all of neurobiology,
which is relevant, can be captured
by classical equations of motion.
Because in my view, the mysteries of the brain
are not the mysteries of quantum mechanics,
but the mysteries of what can happen
when you have a dynamical system, driven system,
with 10 of the 14 parts.
That complexity is something which
is that the physics of complex systems
is at least as badly understood as the physics of phase
coherence in quantum mechanics.
Can we go there for a second?
You've talked about attractor networks.
And just maybe you could say, what are attractor networks?
And more broadly, what are interesting network dynamics
that emerge in these or other complex systems?
You have to be willing to think in a huge number of dimensions,
because in a huge number of dimensions,
the behavior of a system can be thought
as just the motion of the point over time
in this huge number of dimensions.
All right.
And an attractor network is simply
a network where there is a line and other lines
converge on it in time.
That's the essence of an attractor network.
In a highly dimensional space.
And the easiest way to get that is
to do it in a high dimensional space, where
some of the dimensions provide the dissipation, which
I have a physical system.
Projectories can't contract everywhere.
They have to contract in some places and expand in others.
There's a fundamental classical theorem
of statistical mechanics, which goes
under the name of Leoville's theorem, which
says you can't contract everywhere.
If you contract somewhere, you expand somewhere else.
It is an interesting physical systems.
You get driven systems where you have a small subsystem, which
is the interesting part.
And the rest of the contraction and expansion,
the physicists would say, is entropy
flow in this other part of the system.
But basically, attractor networks
are dynamics funneling down so that you can't be any.
So that if you start somewhere in the dynamical system,
you will soon find yourself on a pretty well determined
pathway, which goes somewhere.
If you start somewhere else, you'll
wind up on a different pathway.
But I don't have just all possible things.
You have some defined pathways, which are allowed,
and under which you will converge.
And that's the way you make a stable computer,
and that's the way you make a stable behavior.
So in general, looking at the physics
of the emergent stability in these networks,
what are some interesting characteristics
that what are some interesting insights
from studying the dynamics of such high dimensional systems?
Most dynamical systems, most driven dynamical systems,
by driven they're coupled somehow to an energy source.
And so if their dynamics keeps going
because it's coupling to the energy source,
most of them it's very difficult to understand at all
with the dynamical behavior is going to be.
You have to run it.
There's a subset of systems, which
is what is actually known to the mathematicians
as a Lyapunov function.
And those systems, you can understand convergent dynamics
by saying you're going downhill on something or other.
And that's what I found with ever knowing
what the Lyapunov functions were in the simple model
I made in the early 80s, was that energy functions
you could understand how you could get this channeling
on the pathways without having to follow the dynamics
in infinite detail.
You started rolling a ball off of a mountain
that's going to wind up at the bottom of a valley.
You know that it's true without actually watching
the ball roll down.
There's certain properties of the system
that when you can know that.
That's right.
And not all systems behave that way.
Most don't, probably.
Both don't.
But it provides you with a metaphor
for thinking about systems which are stable
and who do have these attractors behave,
even if you can't find the Lyapunov function behind them
or an energy function behind them.
It gives you a metaphor for thought.
Speaking of thought, if I had a glint in my eye
with excitement and said, you know,
I'm really excited about this something called
deep learning and neural networks
and I would like to create an intelligent system
and came to you as an advisor, what would you recommend?
And is it a hopeless pursuit to use neural networks
to achieve thought?
Is it, what kind of mechanisms should we explore?
What kind of ideas should we explore?
Well, you look at the simple networks,
one past networks.
They don't support multiple hypotheses very well.
As I have tried to work with very simple systems
which do something which you might consider to be thinking,
thought has to do with the ability to do mental exploration
before you take a physical action.
Almost like we were mentioning playing chess,
visualizing, simulating inside your head different outcomes.
Yeah, yeah.
And now you could do that in a feed forward network
because you've pre calculated all kinds of things.
But I think the way neurobiology does it
hasn't pre calculated everything.
It actually has parts of a dynamical system
in which you're doing exploration in a way which is...
There's a creative element.
Like there's an...
And in a simple minded neural net,
you have a constellation of instances
from which you've learned.
And if you are within that space,
if a new question is a question within this space,
you can actually rely on that system pretty well
to come up with a good suggestion for what to do.
If on the other hand the query comes from outside the space,
you have no way of knowing how the system is going to behave.
There are no limitations on what could happen.
And so the artificial neural net world
is always very much...
I have a population of examples.
The test set must be drawn from this equivalent population.
The test set has examples which are from a population
which is completely different.
There's no way that you could expect to get the answer right.
What they call outside the distribution.
That's right.
And so if you see a ball rolling across the street in dusk,
if that wasn't in your training set,
the idea that a child may be coming close behind that
is not going to occur to the neural net.
And it is to our...
There's something in your biology that allows that.
Yeah.
There's something in the way of what it means
to be outside of the population of the training set.
The population of the training set
isn't just sort of this set of examples.
There's more to it than that.
And it gets back to my question of,
what is it to understand something?
Yeah.
You know, in a small tangent,
you've talked about the value of thinking
of deductive reasoning in science versus large data collection.
So sort of thinking about the problem.
I suppose it's the physics side of you
of going back to first principles and thinking.
But what do you think is the value of deductive reasoning
in the scientific process?
Well, they're obviously scientific questions
in which the root to the answer to it
comes through the analysis of what hell of a lot of data.
Right.
Cosmology, that kind of stuff.
And that's never been the kind of problem
in which I've had any particular insight.
I must say, if you look at...
Cosmology is one of those.
If you look at the actual things that Jim Peebles,
one of this year's Nobel Prize in physics,
one's from the local physics department,
the kinds of things he's done,
he's never crunched large data.
Never, never, never.
He's used the encapsulation
of the work of others in this regard.
Right.
But ultimately boiled down to thinking through the problem.
Like, what are the principles
under which a particular phenomenon operates?
Yeah.
And look, physics is always going to look for ways
in which you can describe the system
in a way which rises above the details.
And to the hard dyed and the wool biologist,
biology works because of the details.
And physics, to the physicists,
we want an explanation which is right
in spite of the details.
And there will be questions which we cannot answer as physicists
because the answer cannot be found that way.
There's not sure if you're familiar
with the entire field of brain computer interfaces
that's become more and more intensely researched
and developed recently,
especially with companies like Neuralink with Elon Musk.
Yeah, I know there have always been the interest
both in things like getting the eyes
to be able to control things
or getting the thought patterns
to be able to move what had been a connected limb
which is now connected through a computer.
That's right.
So in the case of Neuralink,
they're doing a thousand plus connections
where they're able to do two way,
activate and read spikes, neural spikes.
Do you have hope for that kind of computer brain interaction
in the near or maybe even far future
of being able to expand the ability of the mind of cognition
or understand the mind?
It's interesting watching things go
when I first became interested in neurobiology.
Most of the practitioners thought
you would be able to understand neurobiology
by techniques which allowed you to record
only one cell at a time.
One cell, yeah.
People like David Hubel
very strongly reflected that point of view.
And that's been taken over by a generation,
a couple of generations later,
by a set of people who says
not until we can record from 10 to the 4
or 10 to the 5 at a time
will we actually be able to understand
how the brain actually works.
And in a general sense,
I think that's right.
You have to begin to be able to look
for the collective modes,
the collective operation of things.
It doesn't rely on this action
and potential of that cell.
It relies on the collective properties
of this set of cells connected
with this kind of patterns and so on.
And you're not going to succeed
in seeing what those collective activities are
without recording many cells at once.
The question is how many at once?
What's the threshold?
And that's the...
Look, it's being pursued hard
in the motor cortex.
The motor cortex does something
which is complex,
and yet the problem you're trying to address
is fairly simple.
Neurobiology does it in ways that are different
from the way an engineer would do it.
An engineer would put in six highly accurate
stepping motors controlling a limb
rather than 100,000 muscle fibers,
each of which has to be individually controlled.
And so understanding how to do things
in a way which is much more forgiving
and much more neural,
I think, would benefit the engineering world.
The engineering world touch.
Let's put it in a pressure sensor or two,
rather than an array of a gazillion pressure sensors,
none of which are accurate,
all of which are perpetually recalibrating themselves.
You're saying your hope is your advice
for the engineers of the future
is to embrace the large chaos of a messy,
error prone system like those of the biological systems.
That's probably the way to solve some of these.
I think you'll be able to make better computations
slash robotics that way than by trying
to force things into a robotics where joint motors
are powerful and stepping motors are accurate.
But then the physicists, the physicists in you
will be lost forever in such systems
because there's no simple fundamentals
to explore in systems that are so large and messy.
You say that, and yet there's a lot of physics
in the Navier Stokes equations,
the equations of nonlinear hydrodynamics,
huge amount of physics in them.
All the physics of atoms and molecules has been lost
but has been replaced by this other set of equations
which is just as true as the equations at the bottom.
Those equations are going to be harder to find
in general biology, but the physicist in me
says there are probably some equations of that sort.
They're out there.
They're out there, and if physics is going to
contribute anything, it may contribute to trying
to find out what those equations are
and how to capture them from the biology.
Would you say that's one of the main open problems
of our age is to discover those equations?
Yeah.
If you look at, there's molecules
and there's psychological behavior,
and these two are somehow related.
There are layers of detail,
there are layers of collectiveness,
and to capture that in some vague way,
several stages on the way up to see how these things
can actually be linked together.
It seems in our universe there's a lot of
elegant equations that can describe the fundamental way
that things behave, which is a surprise.
It's compressible into equations.
It's simple and beautiful.
It's still an open question whether that link
is equally between molecules and the brain
is equally compressible into elegant equations.
But you're both a physicist and a dreamer.
You have a sense that...
Yeah, but I can only dream physics dreams.
Physics dreams.
There was an interesting book called Einstein's Dreams,
which alternates between chapters on his life
and descriptions of the way time might have been,
but isn't.
The linking between these being of course
ideas that Einstein might have had
to think about the essence of time
as he was thinking about time.
So speaking of the essence of time
and your biology, you're one human,
famous impactful human,
but just one human with a brain
living the human condition.
But you're ultimately mortal, just like all of us.
Has studying the mind as a mechanism
changed the way you think about your own mortality?
It has really, because particularly as you get older
and the body comes apart in various ways,
I became much more aware of the fact
that what is somebody is contained in the brain
and not in the body that you worry about burying.
And it is to a certain extent true
that for people who write things down, equations,
dreams, note beds, diaries,
fractions of their thought does continue to live
after their dead and gone,
after their body is dead and gone.
And there's a sea change in that going on
in my lifetime between
when my father died, except for the things
that were actually written by him,
as there were very few facts about him
that have been recorded,
and a number of facts that are recorded
about each and every one of us forever now,
as far as I can see, in the digital world.
And so the whole question of what is death,
may be different for people a generation ago
and a generation further ahead.
We have become immortal under some definitions.
Yeah, yeah.
Last easy question.
What is the meaning of life?
Looking back, you've studied the mind,
us weird descendants of apes.
What's the meaning of our existence on this little earth?
Oh, that word meaning is as slippery as the word understand.
Interconnected somehow, perhaps.
Is there, it's slippery, but is there something
that you, despite being slippery,
can hold long enough to express?
Well, I've been amazed at how hard it is
to define the things in a living system
in the sense that one hydrogen atom is pretty much like another.
But one bacterium is not so much like another bacterium,
even of the same nominal species.
In fact, the whole notion of what is the species
gets a little bit fuzzy.
And do species exist in the absence of certain classes of environments?
And pretty soon one winds up with the biology
which the whole thing is living.
But whether there's actually any element of it
which by itself would be said to be living
becomes a little bit vague in my mind.
So in a sense, the idea of meaning
is something that's possessed by an individual,
like a conscious creature.
And you're saying that it's all interconnected
in some kind of way that there might not even be an individual,
or all kind of this complicated mess of biological systems
at all different levels,
where the human starts and when the human ends, it's unclear.
Yeah, and we're in neurobiology.
We're the, oh, you say the neocortex does the thinking,
but there's lots of things that are done in the spinal cord.
And so we say, what is the essence of thought?
Is it just going to be neocortex?
Can't be. Can't be.
Yeah, maybe to understand and to build thought,
you have to build the universe along with the neocortex.
It's all interlinked through the spinal cord.
John, it's a huge honor talking today.
Thank you so much for your time. I really appreciate it.
Well, thank you for the challenge of talking with you,
and it would be interesting to see whether you can win
five minutes out of this and just go here in a sense to anyone.
Beautiful.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with John Hopfield,
and thank you to our presenting sponsor, Cash App.
Download it, use code LEX Podcast.
You'll get $10, and $10 will go to first.
An organization that inspires and educates young minds
to become science and technology innovators of tomorrow.
If you enjoy this podcast, subscribe on YouTube,
give it five stars on Apple Podcasts, support on Patreon,
or simply connect with me on Twitter at Lex Freedman.
And now let me leave you with some words of wisdom
from John Hopfield in his article titled, Now What.
Choosing problems is the primary determinant
of what one accomplishes in science.
I have generally had a relatively short attention span
in science problems. Thus, I have always been on the lookout
for more interesting questions, either as my present ones
get worked out, or as they get classified by me
as intractable, given my particular talents.
He then goes on to say,
What I have done in science relies entirely
on experimental and theoretical studies by experts.
I have a great respect for them, especially for those
who are willing to attempt communication with someone
who is not an expert in the field.
I would only add that experts are good at answering questions.
If you're brash enough, ask your own.
Don't worry too much about how you found them.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.